---
layout: post
title: "90s rewind"
image: /assets/sematary/90srewind.png
excerpt: "90srewind was a 90s-themed podcast, which I recorded together with a co-host. It offered great insight into how podcasting works, and we ended before the hype really took off."
---
Having two people casually talking about their childhood experiences in one of
the most exciting and beloved centuries - what a great idea! Too bad it wasn't
mine, but the idea behind a podcast called [Young in the
80s](http://younginthe80s.de/). I loved the idea a lot and wished there was
something similar for the 90s - so I reached out to the creators of Young in the
80s and asked them for permission to use their idea for a 90s related podcast.
Luckily, they agreed!

## What it was
A podcast in which a good childhood friend of mine and I talked about how we
perceived growing up in the 90s. We had a lot of fun recording the episodes and
remembering the good times of the past while preparing for it.

## What I learned
Even back then, podcasts had a huge audience. I remember giving a webinar as
part of my job - and then having someone reach out to me and ask if I am "the
guy from 90srewind" - because they recognized my voice!

Also, this podcast took place while the podcast market was undergoing a lot of
growth and change, and it was difficult to stay on track with all the changes in
the market. Our podcast with our rather modest level of professionalism would
probably not attract any listeners today.

## How it ended
Time constraints. Podcasting is not only about finding a time slot to record,
but you actually have to prepare - and once a recording is done, the
post-processing starts, which takes even longer than the recording itself.

Podcasting is a very time consuming commitment, especially if more than one host
is involved.

That having said, I did experiment with a podcast on my own back then, but it
just felt weird talking to no one in particular without a co-host, so I have let
that side project silently die.

*This post is part of my Pet Project Sematary, [click here to get to the first post in this series.](/sematary/start)*