---
layout: post
title: "thingsmap"
image: /assets/sematary/thingsmap.png
excerpt: "Is it a good idea to get updates from all around you, unfiltered? thingsmap helped me to find out."
---
Back in 2013, location-based social media was still quite new. More
specifically, the idea of geo-tagging your instagram images, your tweets or your
Flickr images was something that has just started to gain traction - and
consequently, it has sparked privacy discussions which are now long forgotten.

In the midst of all this, I built thingsmap. I had just moved from being a
Software Engineer to being a Product Owner and was experimenting with Lean
Startup at the time - so I was torn between building something beautiful and
technically sound - and building something that can be delivered fast to see if
there is any kind of interest in the thing I was building.

## What it was
The idea of thingsmap is fairly easy: See Social Media Activity on a map. For
any given city, the web app would get real time updates about tweets, instagram
and flickr images, foursquare check ins and wikipedia articles. The result was a
mesmerizing web site which showed you the heartbeat of a city - I remember
watching the activity in Rome while the sun set - slowly, selfies at the
Colosseum at dusk were replaced by check ins in bars and restaurants as well as
images of food.

A spin off of thingsmap was the iOS app "heartbeat", which showed real time
updates without a map, but as a feed, and not for a specific city, but for the
user's current location.

## What I learned
Well, what I *told* myself I learned was that this kind of app generates one of the following two extremes for a user:

- Either you see nothing at all because you are somewhere in the hinterlands
- Or your map or phone blows up because of the sheer amount of real time updates
  around you.

In hindsight, the idea is something that definitely had aesthetical value, but
the actual benefit for any user is zero. But it was fun to code, which was my
main driver at the time.

*This post is part of my Pet Project Sematary, [click here to get to the first
post in this series.](/sematary/start)*