---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
image: /images/avatar_full.png
excerpt: "Meet Philipp Flenker - a Software Engineering expert from Germany."
---
Hallo und Hi There, thanks for stopping by! I'm Philipp, an Engineering
Manager residing in Luedinghausen, North-Rhine Westphalia, Germany, with a focus
on building happy and productive teams.

I obtained my Master's Degree in Computer Science from the [Westfaelische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster](https://www.uni-muenster.de) in 2011. Since then,
I have worked in many diverse roles, such as Team or Engineering Lead, Agile
Coach, Product Owner or a combination.

I love technology, and one of my earlier childhood memories is feeding long rows
of `DATA` from a computer magazine into my Commodore 64 - only to be rewarded
with `?SYNTAX ERROR IN LINE 82` (If you are interested, [you can read the full
story here](/sematary/what-me-worry)!). However, during my first job as a
graduate, I started to discover that while a talented developer can save more
than just the project, a focussed team of engineers is nigh unstoppable - which
is why I decided that focussing on the technology alone would not be enough. 

So I have dedicated most of my professional career to figuring out how to bring
people together, focus them as teams toward a common goal and remove all
unnecessary hindrances along the way. I believe that a good manager or leader's
job is to bring people together as a team, keep them focussed on the goal,
protect them from distractions and trust them to get the job done. I am humbled
and proud to say that this people-first approach has been rewarded by my peers
at OpusCapita, [who made me the only person to receive the internal Value
Ambassador award two
times.](https://www.opuscapita.com/blog/2020/meet-philipp-flenker)

If you are interested in my professional background, you can find my CV on
[LinkedIn (English)](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pflenker/) or [Xing
(German)](https://www.xing.com/profile/Philipp_Flenker/).You can also follow me
on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/philippflenker) or
[Instagram](https://www.instagram.com/philippflenker/?hl=en).

In my spare time, I code stuff to make sure I stay up to date with current tech
trends. These days, I dabble with React, React Native, Rust and TypeScript. 

You can contact me at
[hello@philippflenker.com](mailto:hello@philippflenker.com) if you want to get
in touch, start a discussion or simply say hi!
