---
layout: post
title: "How do we stop talking about issue numbers and start talking about what matters?"
---
This question revolves around the Daily Standup and the too-common situation
where people talk a bit like this:

> Yesterday I worked on PROJ-2342 and got pretty far with it. Today, I will 
look at PROJ-4223, except when my help is needed on PROJ-2323.  
>   
> -- *Typical dysfunctional standup*

Talking about ticket numbers, like the ones autogenerated by JIRA, is mostly useless. Even on small teams,
no one has all the ticket numbers and their contents present and can actually
follow along when these ticket numbers are being raised - even highly skilled
Product Owners will find it very hard to immediately connect the ticket numbers 
to the contents of said ticket.

## The Standup Is Not A Status Update
More often than not, the root cause of updates like these is a misconception
about what the standup is about. A surprisingly huge amount of people believe 
that the standup is a status update, where everyone talks about what they did 
yesterday and what they are going to do today. So they are doing it exactly like
that: They are reporting which items they have worked on.

But the Standup is not a status update. It's a collaboration towards a common 
goal. During the planning, the team has found a goal which seemed realistic 
to them at that point, and every day, the team comes together to inspect the
progress so far and adapt the plan for the remaining time.

In that context, mentioning the ticket numbers makes no sense at all. Every ticket
has a context in relation to the overall sprint goal, which might not be apparent 
even from the ticket. For example, a ticket might be "the risky one" or "a big one", 
so they need to get special attention and treatment. Regardless of the context
a team usually attaches to a ticket, it's this context that should be mentioned, 
because it relates to the overall plan.

## Getting there
You stop mentioning issue numbers by stopping to mention task numbers. Make it a rule
in the retro. Hold each other accountable. Make a game out of it, have someone call it out. 
Make it fun and light-hearted, and keep the team focussed on the actual goal of the daily standup.

_This post is part of the [Product Owner Q&A](/po_qa/start) series._