---
layout: postwithdiff
title: "Hecto, Chapter 2: Reading User Input"
categories: [Rust, hecto, Tutorial]
permalink: /hecto-chapter-2/
image: /assets/2019-11-08-hecto-chapter-2.png
date: 2019-11-08 00:00:03
last_modified_at: 2020-10-29
---
[Previous chapter]({% post_url 2019-11-08-rust-text-editor-chapter-1%}) - [Overview]({% post_url 2019-11-08-rust-text-editor%}) - [Appendices]({% post_url 2019-11-08-rust-text-editor-appendix%}) - [Next Chapter]({% post_url 2019-11-08-rust-text-editor-chapter-3%}) 
{: style="text-align: center"}

Letâ€™s try and read key presses from the user. Remove the line with "Hello,
world" from `main` and change your code as follows:

{% include hecto/read-keys.html %}

<small>[See this step on github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/read-keys)</small>

Play around with that program and try to find out how it works. To stop it,
press <kbd>Ctrl-C</kbd>.

First, we are using `use` to import things into our program. We would like to do
something with the input/output of the system, `io` in short. So we use  `use
std::io::{self, Read}`, which imports `io` for us and is short for:

```rust
use std::io;
use std::io::Read;
```

After this, we are able to use `io` in our code, and bringing `Read` into our
code enables us to use `bytes()`. Try running your code without importing
`Read`, and the compiler will exit with an error explaining that `Read` needs,
in fact, to be in scope, because it brings the implementation of `bytes` with
it. This concept is called a *trait*, and we will take a deeper look at traits
later in this tutorial. The [documentation on
traits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html) is definitely
something to add on your reading list!

If you are new to Rust, don't worry. We have a bit of learning to do in this
chapter, but future code additions won't bring as many new concepts at once as
this one. Also, some of the concepts get clearer as the tutorial progresses, so
don't worry if you don't understand everything at once.

The first line in `main` does a lot of things at once, which can be summarized
as "For every byte you can read from the keyboard, bind it to `b` and execute
the following block".

Let's unravel that line now.  `io::stdin()` means that we want to call a method
called `stdin` from `io` - `io` being one of the things we just imported.
`stdin` represents the [Standard Input
Stream](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams#Standard_input_(stdin)),
which, simply put, gives you access to everything that can be put into your
program.

Calling `bytes()` on `io::stdin()` returns something we can *iterate over*, or
in other words: Something which lets us perform the same task on a series of
elements. In Rust, same as many other languages, [this concept is called an
Iterator.](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch13-02-iterators.html)

Using an Iterator allows us to build a loop with `for..in`. With `for..in` in
combination with `bytes()`, we are asking rust to read byte from the standard
input into the variable `b`, and to keep doing it until there are no more bytes
to read. The two lines after `for..in` print out each character - we will
explain `unwrap` and `println!` later - and return if there is nothing more to
read.

When you run `./hecto`, your terminal gets hooked up to the standard input, and
so your keyboard input gets read into the `b` variable. However, by default your
terminal starts in **canonical mode**, also called **cooked mode**. In this
mode, keyboard input is only sent to your program when the user presses
<kbd>Enter</kbd>. This is useful for many programs: it lets the user type in a
line of text, use <kbd>Backspace</kbd> to fix errors until they get their input
exactly the way they want it, and finally press <kbd>Enter</kbd> to send it to
the program. But it does not work well for programs with more complex user
interfaces, like text editors. We want to process each key press as it comes in,
so we can respond to it immediately.

To exit the above program, press <kbd>Ctrl-D</kbd> to tell Rust that it's
reached the end of file. Or you can always press <kbd>Ctrl-C</kbd> to signal the
process to terminate immediately.

What we want is **raw mode**. Fortunately, there are external libraries
available to set the terminal to raw mode. Libraries in Rust are called Crates -
if you want to read up on those, [here's the link to the
docs](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch07-00-managing-growing-projects-with-packages-crates-and-modules.html).
Like many other programming languages, Rust comes with a lean core and relies on
crates to extend its functionality. In this tutorial, we will sometimes do
things manually first before switching to external functionality, and sometimes
we jump directly to the library function.

## Press <kbd>q</kbd> to quit?

To demonstrate how canonical mode works, we'll have the program exit when it
reads a <kbd>q</kbd> key press from the user.

{% include hecto/q-to-quit.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/q-to-quit)</small>

Note that in Rust, characters require single quotes, `'` , instead of double
quotes, `"`, to work!

To quit this program, you will have to type a line of text that includes a `q`
in it, and then press enter. The program will quickly read the line of text one
character at a time until it reads the `q`, at which point the `for..in` loop
will stop and the program will exit. Any characters after the `q` will be left
unread on the input queue and not printed out. Rust discards them while exiting.

## Entering raw mode by using Termion
Change your `Cargo.toml` as follows:

{% include hecto/add-termion.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/add-termion)</small>

With this, we are telling `cargo` that we want to have a dependency called
`termion`, in the version 1. Cargo follows a concept called [Semantic
Versioning](https://semver.org/), where a program version usually consists of
three numbers (like 0.1.0), and by convention, no breaking change occurs as long
as the first number stays the same. That means that if you develop against
`termion v1.5.0`, your program will also work with `termion v1.5.1` or even
`termion v1.7.0`. This is useful, because it means that we are getting bugfixes
and new features, but the existing features can still be used without us having
to change our code. By setting `termion = "1"`, we are making sure we are getting
the latest version starting with `1`.

Next time you run `cargo build` or `cargo run`, the new dependency, `termion`
will be downloaded and compiled, and the output will look something like this:
```
   Compiling libc v0.2.62
   Compiling numtoa v0.1.0
   Compiling termion v1.5.3
   Compiling hecto v0.1.0 (/home/philipp/repositories/hecto)
    Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 7.83s

```

As you can see, `termion` comes with dependencies itself, and `cargo` downloads
and compiles them, too. You might notice that the `Cargo.lock` has also changed:
It now contains the exact names and versions of all packages and dependencies
which have been installed. This is helpful to avoid "Works on my machine" - bugs
if you are working on a team, where you are encountering a bug in, say, `termion
v1.2.3`, while your co-worker is on `termion v1.2.4` and doesn't see it.

Now change the `main.rs` as follows:

{% include hecto/into-raw-mode.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/into-raw-mode)</small>

Try it out, and you will notice that every character you type in is immediately
printed out, and as soon as you type `q`, the program ends.

So what did we do?

There are a few things to note here. First, we are using `termion` to provide
`stdout`, the [counterpart of `stdin` from
above](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams#Standard_output_(stdout))
with a function called `into_raw_mode()`, which we are calling. But why are we
calling that method on `stdout` to change how we read from `stdin`? The answer
is that terminals have their states controlled by the writer, not the reader.
The writer is used to draw on the screen or move the cursor, so it is also used
to change the mode as well.

Second, we are assigning the result of `into_raw_mode` to a variable named
`_stdout` but we are not doing anything with that variable. Why? Because this is
our first encounter with Rust's [Ownership
System](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch04-00-understanding-ownership.html). To
summarize a complex concept, functions can ?_own_ certain things. Un-owned
things will be removed. `into_raw_mode` modifies the terminal and returns a
value which, once it is removed, will reset the terminal into canonical mode -
so we need to keep it around by binding it to `_stdout`. You can try it out by
removing `let _stdout =` - the terminal won't stay in raw mode.

By prefixing the variable with a `_`, we are actually telling others reading our
code that we want to hold on to `_stdout` even though we are not using it. If
you have an unused variable not prefixed with `_`, the compiler will assume that
you have made a mistake and warn you.

Though the topic of ownership is complex, you don't need to fully understand it
at this point. Your understanding will grow over the course of this tutorial.

## Observing key presses

To get a better idea of how input in raw mode works, let's improve on how we
print out each byte that we read.

{% include hecto/observe-keypresses.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/observe-keypresses)</small>

Before we discuss the new functionality, let's go through the changes quickly.

First, we are no longer only printing the character `c`, but also the byte code
`b`. In case you are wondering about `b`: in Rust, it is perfectly legal to
declare a variable twice. We are declaring `b` first in `for b in...`, and then
again with `let b = b.unwrap()`. This is called variable shadowing, and it is
immensely useful: The first value of `b`is not useful for us, as we only want to
work with the "unwrapped" value (I promise, we will explain that soon!).
Variable shadowing makes sure we don't have to have to deal with two variables,
like `b_wrapped` and `b`. Try playing around with this concept by dropping the
`let` in `let b...`.

By the way, the `as` keyword attempts to transform a primitive value into
another one, in this case a byte into a single `char`.

`is_control()` tests whether a character is a control character. Control
characters are non-printable characters that we don't want to print to the
screen. ASCII codes 0&ndash;31 are all control characters, and 127 is also a
control character. ASCII codes 32&ndash;126 are all printable. (Check out the
[ASCII table](http://asciitable.com) to see all of the characters.)

`println!` is a macro which prints its input in a single line. `{}` and `{:?}`
within the argument passed to `println!` are placeholders which are filled with
the remaining parameters - so `println!("This is a char: {}", 'c');` will print
out "This is a char: c" . The placeholder `{}` is for elements for which a
printable representation is known, such as a `char`. `{:?}` is a placeholder for
elements for which a string representation is not known, but a "debug string
representation" has been implemented. To understand the difference, try swapping
around `{}` and `{:?}` and vice versa and see what happens (Understanding that
difference is not crucial for building `hecto`, though).

We are also printing out  `\r` (Carriage Return) at the end of each line. This
makes sure our output is neatly printed line by line without indentation. The
carriage return moves the cursor back to the beginning of the current line
before `println!` adds a `\n` (newline), which moves the cursor down a line,
scrolling the screen if necessary. (These two distinct operations originated in
the days of typewriters and
[teletypes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teleprinter).)

This is a very useful program. It shows us how various key presses translate into
the characters we read. Most ordinary keys translate directly into the
characters they represent. But try seeing what happens when you press the arrow
keys, or <kbd>Escape</kbd>, or <kbd>Page Up</kbd>, or <kbd>Page Down</kbd>, or
<kbd>Home</kbd>, or <kbd>End</kbd>, or <kbd>Backspace</kbd>, or
<kbd>Delete</kbd>, or <kbd>Enter</kbd>. Try key combinations with
<kbd>Ctrl</kbd>, like <kbd>Ctrl-A</kbd>, <kbd>Ctrl-B</kbd>, etc.

You'll notice a few interesting things:
-  Arrow keys, <kbd>Page Up</kbd>, <kbd>Page Down</kbd>, <kbd>Home</kbd>, and
   <kbd>End</kbd> all input 3 or 4 bytes to the terminal: `27`, `[`, and then
   one or two other characters. This is known as an *escape sequence*. All
   escape sequences start with a `27` byte. Pressing <kbd>Escape</kbd> sends a
   single `27` byte as input, which explains either the name of the key or the
   sequence.
- <kbd>Backspace</kbd> is byte `127`.
- <kbd>Enter</kbd> is byte `13`, which is a carriage return character, also
  known as `'\r'` - and not, as you might expect, a newline, `'\n'`
- Special characters such as German umlauts also produce multiple bytes.
- <kbd>Ctrl-A</kbd> is `1`, <kbd>Ctrl-B</kbd> is `2`, <kbd>Ctrl-C</kbd> is...
  `3` and doesn't terminate the program as you might have expected. And the rest
  of the <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> key combinations  seem to map the letters A&ndash;Z to
  the codes 1&ndash;26.


## Press <kbd>Ctrl-Q</kbd> to quit
We now know that the <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> key combined with the alphabetic keys seems
to map to bytes 1&ndash;26. We can use this to detect <kbd>Ctrl</kbd> key
combinations and map them to different operations in our editor. We'll use that
to map <kbd>Ctrl-Q</kbd> to the quit operation.

{% include hecto/ctrl-q-to-quit.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/ctrl-q-to-quit)</small>

If you think that this whole bitwise-voodoo is too low-level for the task, then
you are right! We are doing this now to get a better understanding about the
fundamentals, but we will refactor it in the next chapter.

The `to_ctrl_byte` function bitwise-ANDs a character with the value `00011111`,
in binary. If you are interested, you can use `println!("{:#b}", b);` to print
out the binary representation of the variable `b` (The b in `{:#b}` and the
variable name `b` are not related).  Try this to see the actual bytes which are
read into our program. When you compare the output for <kbd>Ctrl-Key</kbd> with
the output of the key without <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>, you will notice that Ctrl sets
the upper 3 bits to `0`.  If we now remember how bitwise and works, we can see
that `to_ctrl_byte` does just the same.

The ASCII character set seems to be designed this way on purpose.  (It is also
similarly designed so that you can set and clear a bit to switch between
lowercase and uppercase. If you are interested, find out which byte it is and
what the impact is on combinations such as <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>a</kbd> in
contrast to <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>Shift</kbd>-<kbd>a</kbd>.)

## Error Handling
It's time to think about how we handle errors. First, we add a `die()` function
that prints an error message and exits the program.

{% include hecto/die-on-error.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/die-on-error)</small>

`panic!` is a macro which crashes the program with an error message.  Unlike
some other programming languages, Rust does not allow you to add some kind of
`try..catch` block around the code to catch any error that might occur. Instead,
we are propagating errors up alongside the function return values, which will
allow us to treat errors at the highest level.

This propagation works so that a function where an error could happen returns
something called a
[Result](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch09-02-recoverable-errors-with-result.html),
which is a wrapper around the result we're after, or an error. Every value in
`b` is originally a `Result`, which either holds an `Ok` wrapping the byte we
have read in, or an `Err` which wraps an Error object, indicating that something
went wrong while reading the byte. To get the value we need, we can call
`unwrap`, which is short for: "If we have an `Ok`, return the value wrapped in
it. `panic` if we have an `Err`."

We want to control the crash ourselves instead of letting Rust `panic` whenever
an error occurs, because later on, we want to clear the screen before crashing,
to not leave the user with half-drawn input. For now, let's simply check for an
error and call `die`, which panics for us.

Let's implement that now.

{% include hecto/die-on-input-error.html %}

<small>[See this step on
github](https://github.com/pflenker/hecto-tutorial/tree/die-on-input-error)</small>


Here are a few more things to observe. We are deliberately ignoring the error
from `into_raw_mode`. Our error handling is mainly aimed at avoiding garbled
output, which can only occur when we are actually repeatedly writing to the
screen, so for our purposes, there is no need for any additional error handling
before our loop begins.

Then, we have introduced a new concept: `match`. For now, you can think about
`match` as a supersized `if-then-else`. It takes the original variable `b`,
which either contains the value we want wrapped in `Ok`, or an error wrapped in
`Err`. Let's look at an easier example:

```rust
//...
match foo {
    Ok(bar) => {
        //...
    },
    Err(err) => {
        //...
    }
}
//...
```
This code can be read as: If the variable `foo` is an `Ok` value, unwrap its
contents, bind it to the variable `bar` and execute the following code block. In
our case, we use variable shadowing again, so that the wrapped variable `b` will
be unwrapped and bound to `b`.

We will investigate `match` more deeply later. [Here's the link to the docs in
case you are interested.](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch06-02-match.html)

## Conclusion
That concludes this chapter on entering raw mode. We have learned a lot about
the terminal and about the fundamentals of Rust along the way.  In the [next
chapter]({% post_url 2019-11-08-rust-text-editor-chapter-3%}), we'll do some
more terminal input/output handling, and use that to draw to the screen and
allow the user to move the cursor around. We will also refactor our code to be
more idiomatic, but first, we need to clarify what _idiomatic_ means.